---
title: asaphilosophy
layout: about
permalink: /asaphilosophy.html
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

# 1.2 Why is Buddhism seen more as a philosophy?

Buddhism was first introduced to the West by philosophers and orientalists. In Germany, Arthur Schopenhauer's studies on the ethics and philosophy of Buddhism aroused great interest among intellectuals, academics and artists. The establishment of the Theosophical Society in New York in 1875 by Olcott (1832-1907) and Madame Blavatsky (originally the Russian Helene Hahn von Rottenstem, 1831-91) played a key role in enhancing "Indian Spiritualism". In 1893, Anagärika Dharmapäla (1864-1933) spoke at the "World Parliament of Religion" in Chicago, causing Carl Theodor Strauss (1852-1937), a prominent figure in the intellectual community of the time, to convert to Buddhism (Baumann 1996: 349).

It is pertinent to analyse how renowned personalities who disavowed Christianity wholeheartedly embraced Buddhism and sought its profound philosophy.  They accepted Buddhism publicly, but as a religion rather than a way of life or a philosophy. Baumann attests that the translations and literary creations of Western Buddhists aided in the proliferation of Buddhism in modernised societies of Europe and the USA. Furthermore, until the late nineteenth century, Buddhist communities did not carry out any missionary activities in the West (Baumann 1996: 350).

The perspectives on Buddhism developed by Western writers during that era were inevitably biased towards an Oriental viewpoint. Consequently, many who converted to Buddhism under the influence of these works were unable to truly understand the religion. Early Buddhists mainly upheld a form of worship that prioritised meditation, influenced by Theravada Buddhism, over rituals. Nonetheless, it was noticed that an internal Buddhist approach with a meditation emphasis was intentionally favoured during the early stages of belief contacts. While Buddhism was acknowledged as a religion in practice, this Buddhist teaching in the West primarily focused on philosophy rather than religion.

Buddhism is often characterized as having no strict rules, lacking dogmatism and ritualism, whilst promoting creativity and freedom of thought. This fosters compatibility with modern science, leading to descriptions of it as an inner science or spirituality rather than a religion (McMahan 2012: 160). It is worth noting, however, that while there is no unified system of strict practices among Buddhist schools, there are certainly practices that are deem acceptable and others that are not. This brings Buddhism closer to being a religion.

David L. McMahan (2012: 161) defines this approach as “Buddhist Modernism” which is related to our topic.

_`“...This genre, I would suggest, is neither representative of the various forms of Buddhism that have been practiced in Asian for millennia, nor just a Western fantasy, but rather a hybrid religious and cultural form that combines selected elements of Buddhism with the major Western discourses and practices of modernity. Buddhist modernism, then, refers to the various forms of Buddhism that have been significantly shaped by an engagement with the dominant cultural and intellectual forces of modernity, such as the European Enlightenment, scientific rationalism, Romanticism and its successors, Protestantism, psychology, and modern social and political thought. Although influenced by the West, it is not simply ‘Western Buddhism,’ but rather a global network of movements created by both Asians and Westerners that is not the exclusive product of one geographic or cultural setting...”`_

In fact, the modern definition of Buddhism, along with its associated criticism, was introduced by D. T. Suzuki (1870-1966) through his teachings of Zen Buddhism. Suzuki placed emphasis on experience over rituals and doctrines and introduced Buddhism within the framework of universal Buddhism and other world religions. However, post-World War II, Suzuki's popularity and his Oriental approach, which created an exotic perception of the East, overshadowed the true meaning of Buddhism in the field of religion. Buddhism entered the materialistic and post-World War II depressed environment of the West with a spiritual and philosophical narrative. However, it has been persistently depicted as mystical and exotic due to its past Oriental perspectives. In conclusion, Suzuki's Zen Buddhism introduced a partially modernised version to suit the Western audience during the post-World War II era (Goldberg 2006: 292).

After 1945, particularly in Europe, and after 1960 in the USA, the exotic and mystical aura of Buddhism was seen as a solution to the psychological depression in the West. The Vietnam War had led to social and political protests in the USA, due in part to this depression. Owing to Christianity's failure to formulate adequate discourse in response to these challenges and to keep pace with evolving social structures, the responsibility of catering to the spiritual welfare of individuals has been ceded to South Asian religions.

The South Asian religious doctrines, notably Buddhism, and later other Asian religions, which espouse salvation through meditation and personal enlightenment, have resonated within the social milieu. Jainism's principle of ahimsa (non-violence) and the vegetarian approach of Hinduism, similar to Buddhism, provided alternative psychological solutions to the social and political issues encountered by the USA. However, the lack of adoption of these approaches by any Christian tradition also resulted in people feeling disconnected from their past traditions (Goldberg 2006: 293).

It is a difficult task to attribute the recognition of Buddhism as a philosophy or a way of life to a single cause. Nevertheless, identifying it as such is aided by circumstances in the West as well as the significance of early examples. Moreover, the rise in intensity of neoliberal economic policies, along with the advancement of technology, has hugely contributed towards its philosophical complexity coming to the fore. There has been a rise in demand for the ethical and moral significance of Buddhism.

Major universities in the USA, for example, have seen a significant increase in the number of courses on Buddhism in order to prevent social tensions and political polarisation. The corpus of Buddhism has continued to expand rapidly. Westerners have responded well to ads promising solutions to their problems through meditation. Buddhism, alongside other exotic approaches, was first introduced to Western societies as an immigrant and has since become a permanent presence in various contexts. The Buddhism of these countries has created a romanticised environment of freedom for its adherents (Goldberg 2006: 293).

After 1960, the migration to Europe greatly increased the diversity of Buddhist schools in the West. As mentioned previously, the arrival of the teachers of Buddhism from many different Asian countries, especially Tibetans and Japanese, to teach in the West was instrumental in the reintroduction of Buddhism. More specifically, the permanent migration to the West has contributed to the popularisation of Buddhism in all its aspects, with these communities establishing their own representative offices and the desire to experience Buddhism spiritually and physically from the society to which they have migrated (Baumann 2012: 131).

The first generation of immigrants also did not seek to change the orientalist and romanticised approach of books written by Westerners explaining Buddhism to Westerners. The first immigrants held their Buddhist beliefs primarily in isolation. Nevertheless, the second and third generations of Asian immigrants have made attempts at incorporating the dynamics of the society in which they live into their religious-cultural heritage. In a context where the language barrier was relatively low, they adapted their own rituals and hierarchies to the place where they lived and communicated with the dominant community of converts. This led the importance placed on Buddhism to increase, not only in its philosophical dimension but also in its practical applications.  The intention was to rescue Buddhism from being considered merely a philosophy. Since the 1980s, Buddhism has increasingly emphasized its practical, ritual and meditation aspects over its initially emphasized ethical and moral approach.