---
title: Introduction
layout: about
permalink: /introduction.html
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

# Introduction

Buddhism and Buddhist objects became increasingly visible in Europe in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The rise of mass production and faster distribution of products and services, as well as an increased study of Buddhism and growing Western interest in spirituality, are the primary reasons for this rising visibility. By taking a leisure walk in any city in Germany in 2023, it is not surprising to find Buddhist objects in apartment windows, decoration shops, restaurants, hairdressers, in almost every aspect of everyday life. The Buddhist objects in the collection of our research demonstrate this widespread presence in cities and reveal the contexts of their use. The study concentrates on the rise of their visibility and explores the perception of these objects and the values attached to them.

Further information regarding the objects can be accessed on the project's website. However, providing a brief overview of the objects at the start of the study will enhance the understanding of the research context. The collection contains Buddha heads, Buddha body sculptures in various positions, mudra figures and Buddhist lotus flower figures. The collection includes 73 different objects with figures produced under the influence of Chinese, Indian, Japanese, Korean, Nepalese and Thai cultures. The documented objects are located in Berlin, Bochum, Detmold, Frankfurt and Cologne in Germany and Budapest in Hungary. They are generally made of artificial stone, wood-plastic composite, wood and plastic materials. The majority of the objects in the collection for which country of origin information is available were made in China. The items were initially classified into two distinct categories (sold - bought) and subsequently evaluated within the context of their use. The process of selecting, classifying and identifying the objects is analysed in more detail in the Methodology section.

This study argues that the visibility of Buddhist objects in everyday life has increased due to their commodification. This commodification has occurred through an increased interest in 'modern lifestyles enabled by popular culture'. In this sense, the problem of commodification arises from self-help teachings that market only certain forms of Buddhist practice. The "mindfulness" and "spirituality" economies, for example, have an annual revenue of billions of dollars. Buddhism, with its emphasis on rejecting materialistic values and encompassing numerous philosophical and ethical concepts, is marketed to Western consumers with a selective inclusion and it degenerates the Buddhism's religious value.

The motives behind buying a Buddhist item vary from person to person. In my fieldwork, I have found that the meaning attached to an object is determined after it has been purchased. Some people believe that these objects really reflect religious meanings, while others consider them merely decorative objects. For an example, object xxx in our collection is sold in the decorative items section of the Tedi store. This item was once again seen in the shop window of the hairdresser xxx in Bochum. The shopkeeper positioned it in the outer window to draw attention from potential customers walking by. On the other hand, the object xxx that we encountered in the decoration section of the TK Maxx store was also seen in the home of a Buddhist. It was also found in the home of a Buddhist, who attributed religious value to the object and placed it in the most visible place in his home, along with other complementary objects. To summarise, the object begins with a neutral status however, its meaning and function oscillate between two opposite poles, religious and secular, depending on the context. In the secular context, popular culture channels play a major role.

This article discusses the collection in the context of popular culture and commodification. The first section focuses on the reception of Buddhism in the West, using Germany as an example. In this section, a historical approach is adopted to analyse the perception of Buddhism as a religion, lifestyle or commodity in the West. The second part of the study focuses on the purpose of the objects in the collection and the variability of their meanings. Within these examples, the discussions on the sanctity of Buddha statues and the religiosity of material objects are analysed.