# Methodology

This project, which digitally analyses the meaning of Buddhist objects
seen in various city centres in Germany, is part of the
Lehrforschungsprojekt course “[Gandhara Buddhist Art and the Reception,
Documentation, Preservation of Buddhist Heritage in
Pakistan](https://diga.ceres.rub.de/en/)” held at the Ruhr University
Bochum - [Centre for Religious Studies](https://ceres.rub.de/en/) in the
summer semester of 2023.

My interest in digitalised social sciences was sparked by the idea of
making the material and local accessible widely through digital means.
Upon my arrival in Germany as an international student, I was struck by
the local community’s intrigue in South Asian religions. With these two
components coming together, I found myself in this project course. The
idea of making the local reflections of Buddhism here in Bochum
accessible on the internet and the opportunity to research the idea of
examining the contexts of the use of Buddhist objects were my main
motivations. Between April 2023 and the end of the semester, we held
meetings almost every two weeks under the guidance of our supervisors.
At the beginning of the semester, the meetings mainly consisted of
discussions about the Gandhara region and Buddhism. Afterwards, we were
instructed on the software that we would be using and informed about its
details. Over the course of the following meetings, our project matters
were discussed in great detail. The preparation of our collections
underwent a thorough examination, while participants in the project
course engaged in discussions aimed at developing research projects. Our
supervisors provided guidance throughout the process.

My research centres around the adaptation of Buddhist objects in city
centres and the variability of the objects’ meanings. Initially, I had
intended to conduct this research solely in Bochum. However, upon
reflection, I recognized that Buddhist objects were also prominently
displayed in other German cities where I visited for personal reasons.
Consequently, I photographed these objects in four separate German
cities during the research period (Bochum, Detmold, Frankfurt, Berlin).
At the project’s beginning, my collegue Stephan Musharov also sent me
photos from his friend’s shop in Hungary, which sells Buddhist objects,
which added to the diversity of our collection. In addition, he made a
great contribution to the photographs collected in Germany. Furthermore,
my acquaintances to whom I spoke about the project shared photographs of
Buddha statues they saw in local surroundings, but I opted not to
include them in our collection. In summary, the research article
evaluated objects in the Germany collection.

Objects are typically categorized as either sold in decoration shops or
for use in other contexts after purchase. We captured photos of items
found in the decoration store up close, along with their accompanying
components, to display the item’s pricing and production information
clearly. Furthermore, we photographed objects that were placed elsewhere
after being purchased, providing a close-up view with the surrounding
context. It was simpler to discern the object’s context and its
significance within the environment. Following this, we created a
preliminary sketch when defining these objects. The objects were
analysed under 12 different criteria, including colour, material,
cultural influence, photographic location, measurements, mudra,
definition, price, keywords, attributes, position and emotion.

In part two of this article, we assess the reasons for the rise in
prominence of such Buddhist items. We also explore the significance of
these items in context, alongside examples from literature on material
religion. Within the framework of material religious literature, we
investigate the religious atmospheres of items as well as their
placement in non-religious environments.
