---
title: Reframing Spirituality
layout: about
permalink: /newspirituality.html
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

# 2.1. Reframing Spirituality

Undoubtedly, the process of globalisation has facilitated the intercontinental mobility not only of materials and finances, but also of cultures. Both migrations and a growing interest in Asia made Eastern philosophies more popular in the West. Although modernity originated in the West, eastern societies also embraced this approach and exhibited a willingness to share their cultures within the framework of modernity. However, the popularization of Buddhism in the West has resulted in the reinterpretation of emic concepts, leading to some concepts being taken out of context and their meanings being shifted. Buddhism has become more spiritual in meaning in the West due to globalization through migration, media, technology, commodities, and ideas, as well as the incorporation of past narratives into modern lifestyle. The concepts of mind, body and spirit, as well as self-help topics, have gained popularity among Westerners. This cultural phenomenon has been accompanied by a surge in literature pertaining to these topics. It is important to note that this trend was not a spontaneous occurrence, but rather influenced by the changing marketing perception of the media sector (Rocha 2012: 304).

The reinterpreted perception of advertising and media no longer aims to sell through "products/materials" but through ideas, identities, lifestyles and the benefits they provide. In other words, the importance of the tangible object is pushed to the background and the abstract meaning created by the object is prioritised. Nowadays, the consumer has started to attribute meaning to adverts and tend to buy these attributed meanings regardless of the nature of the object. For this reason, the motivation that makes users buy objects also determines the intended use of the products (Borup 2016: 43).  Thus, one of the reasons for the increased visibility of "spirituality" and, as a next step, Buddhism, was the media. The acceptance of the advertisements by the buyers and the purchase of the products popularised them.

Alternative religiosity (Hunt, 2003) or alternative spirituality (Heelas and Woodhead, 2005) emerged after the Second World War, proliferated through global inter-community communication, tourism and mass migration, and were adopted by Western communities at the end of the Cold War. Although alternative religiosity and spirituality place value on communal rituals, they centre around the individual and prioritise their personal experiences (Knoublauch 2008: 146).

Spirituality incorporates charisma, mysticism and holism as its fundamental components. While there can be variations in the definitions of these components from one individual to another, the emphasis remains on individual subjective experiences. This emphasis on subjective experience distinguishes spirituality from conventional religion within the realm of alternative religiosity and alternative spirituality. The aforementioned components serve to establish this distinction. The reinforcement of individuality through mystical approaches creates a unique experience for oneself, distinct from social tradition. Conversely, the holistic approach redefines contemporary life by linking everyday concerns with the spiritual realm. By combining both material and spiritual aspects, alternative approaches offer holistic salvation or relief. The conventional understanding of religion is relatively far from this holism (Knoublauch 2008: 147).

This spiritual approach transcends religion and illuminates the secular realm, generating novel interpretations. The explosion of mass media, internet progress, and social media innovation have expedited this phenomenon. At minimum, individuals with media or internet privileges can access shared content beyond territorial restrictions. However, the absence of established norms, traditions, and institutions in global accessibility renders what is perceived subjective to the user's personal experience. To illustrate, the interpretation of a meditation video shared by a Buddhist teacher may differ among individuals. Furthermore, the manner in which an individual interacts with a video and the appropriateness of their viewing environment, along with other supplementary factors, contribute to a distinctive and personalised viewing experience.

Spiritual popularisation occurs among and by individuals who do not belong to religious congregations. Non-congregants establish a religious communication context, introducing religious elements into culturally secular spaces. Symbols of religion infiltrate popular culture, not only in explicit forms such as the cross, Rock or ying/yang symbols, but also through metaphors. Religion has augmented its visibility through cultural media outlets such as music, music videos and adverts. This was achieved utilising mass media and the market. Nevertheless, this was executed by agents external to religious organisations rather than ecclesiastics or their delegates. To sum up, this evolving spiritual paradigm has brought Buddhism to prominence in this realm.