---
title: Short History of Buddhism in Germany
layout: about
permalink: /shorthistory.html
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

# A Short Recent History of Buddhism in Germany

In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in the West, France, England and Germany were the countries where most research into the Buddhist religion was carried out. The first studies were often made by Christian clergy. Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire's Le Bouddha et Sa Religion in 1860 was published in France. Although this work aimed to establish the supremacy of Christianity by denigrating the Buddhist religion, it is considered one of the most important studies of Buddhism of the period. In England, Thomas W. Rhys Davids established the Pali Text Society, which played a vital role in translating Pali texts and enabling them to be used for scholarly purposes. In the German-speaking region, Hermann Oldenberg authored "Buddha: His Life, his Doctrine, his Order." In the post-1850s period, the number of translations of original texts and studies based on those texts grew continuously. Ref

The increase in textual examples led to an upward trend in the number of converts to Buddhism after 1880. The converts generally favoured the Southern and Theravāda Buddhist traditions. The chief driving force behind those who embraced Buddhism as a religion during that era was the cognitive and rational nature of its teachings. Buddhism was described as a "religion of the mind" grounded on insight and knowledge, making it an appealing option. Buddhist faith started to attract adherents from the middle and upper classes in the period after 1880, as it pro-actively emphasized the autonomy of the individual in contrast to the dogmatic approach of Christianity. Ref

The corpus of Buddhism was enriched in the West through translated texts and, from the 1920s onwards, became practically integrated into everyday life, along with worship, spiritual exercises and other religious activities. In 1921, Georg Grimm and Seidensticker founded the 'Buddhist Community of Germany', which was another significant milestone. Unfortunately, the growing interest in Buddhism in Europe was interrupted for a while by the Second World War. In the aftermath of World War II, Buddhist communities in Germany were able to recover rapidly. This was due in part to the revival of Theravada-oriented communities and the increasing influence of Japanese (Zen) Buddhism in Europe, leading to a resurgence of Buddhism between the 1950s and 1970s. Ref

After the period following World War II, the title for the most widespread Buddhist tradition in Europe changed hands from time to time. Mahayana groups emerged in the 1950s and 60s, focusing on Zen meditation. The popularity of Zen Buddhism communities grew in the 1970s, while the number of Tibetan Buddhist centres increased from the 1980s onwards. Since the mid-1970s, Tibetan Buddhism has gained traction in Europe through tours organised by high-ranking Tibetan teachers and protests led by Tibetans in their homeland. Westerners have been impressed by the 14th Dalai Lama's numerous and regular visits to Europe since 1973 and his charismatic leadership. As a result, the Tibetan Buddhist tradition has become the foremost school of Buddhism in the minds of many since the 1980s. Moreover, several Buddhist traditions have established a substantial number of representative offices throughout Europe whilst there has been a noticeable rise in non-affiliated groups. As Buddhism lacks a centralised administration or ruling superiors, diverse traditions can coexist autonomously within each other in major cities of Europe. Ref

According to Baumann's article, the late 1990s had about 170,000 Buddhists in Germany. The population of Germany at that time was about 82 million.  Notably, the same table indicates that 120,000 of these Buddhists had migrated from Asia. Analysing the official numbers, Buddhism in the late 1990s appears to be a largely migrant-based religion. However, early converts to Buddhism did not have much contact with these migrant Buddhist groups. In the later period, the exclusively migrant characteristic disappeared. Buddhism's congregation significantly grew as a result of groups from all walks of life without any affiliation to the aforementioned traditions. Upon analysis of current figures, there has been a rise in the number of official Buddhist believers to 280,000 over the course of approximately 30 years. Although there has also been an increase in the official figures, the number of people who practise Buddhist worship without a sense of religion is quite high. Ref

The emergence of various Buddhist traditions in Germany has resulted in distinct narratives to achieve this visibility. Each tradition has its unique process of acceptance and diffusion. Our analysis of collected data reveals that 73 Buddhist artefacts have been primarily shaped by Indian and Chinese cultural influences. Nonetheless, this data does not provide a conclusive answer to the extent of influence of each culture. Additionally, the majority of these 73 objects were made using mass-production tools. Almost all of these objects were therefore produced in factories in China and exported to Germany. Thus, drawing conclusions about their ubiquity based solely on the objects we come across in our day-to-day lives may not be accurate.